.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 ABAC Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd March 9, 2026
.Dt ABACCTL 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mac_abac_ctl
.Nd control utility for the ABAC MAC policy module
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm mode
.Op Cm disabled | permissive | enforcing
.Nm
.Cm default
.Op Cm allow | deny
.Nm
.Cm status
.Nm
.Cm stats
.Nm
.Cm limits
.Nm
.Cm rule add
.Ar action operations subject
.Op Cm ctx: Ns Ar constraints
.Cm ->
.Ar object
.Op Cm ctx: Ns Ar constraints
.Op Cm => Ar newlabel
.Nm
.Cm rule remove
.Ar id
.Nm
.Cm rule clear
.Nm
.Cm rule list
.Nm
.Cm rule load
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm rule append
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm rule validate
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm rule add
.Op Fl s Ar set
.Ar rule
.Nm
.Cm rule load
.Op Fl s Ar set
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm set enable
.Ar num | start Ns - Ns Ar end | No all
.Nm
.Cm set disable
.Ar num | start Ns - Ns Ar end | No all
.Nm
.Cm set swap
.Ar set_a set_b
.Nm
.Cm set move
.Ar from_set to_set
.Nm
.Cm set clear
.Ar num
.Nm
.Cm set list
.Op Ar start Ns - Ns Ar end
.Nm
.Cm lock
.Nm
.Cm log
.Op Cm none | error | admin | deny | all
.Nm
.Cm label get
.Ar path
.Nm
.Cm label set
.Ar path label
.Nm
.Cm label remove
.Ar path
.Nm
.Cm test
.Ar operation subject object
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility controls the
.Xr mac_abac 4
kernel module, which implements a flexible label-based Mandatory Access
Control (MAC) policy for FreeBSD.
.Pp
Labels are key-value pairs attached to files (via extended attributes) and
processes (via credential labels).
Rules define access control decisions based on pattern matching against
these labels.
.Ss Commands
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm mode Op Cm disabled | permissive | enforcing
Get or set the enforcement mode.
.Bl -tag -width "permissive" -compact
.It Cm disabled
No access checks performed.
.It Cm permissive
Log denials but allow access (for policy development).
.It Cm enforcing
Enforce access control decisions.
.El
.It Cm default Op Cm allow | deny
Get or set the default policy when no rule matches.
.It Cm status
Display current mode, default policy, and rule count.
.It Cm stats
Display access check statistics (checks, allowed, denied).
.It Cm limits
Display system limits (max rules, max pairs, max label length).
.El
.Ss Rule Management
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm rule add Ar action operations subject Cm -> Ar object Op Cm => Ar newlabel
Add a new access control rule.
.Bl -tag -width "operations" -compact
.It Ar action
One of
.Cm allow ,
.Cm deny ,
or
.Cm transition .
.It Ar operations
Comma-separated list of operations or
.Cm all .
See
.Sx OPERATIONS
below.
.It Ar subject
Pattern to match the calling process label, or
.Cm *
for wildcard.
.It Ar object
Pattern to match the target object label, or
.Cm *
for wildcard.
.It Ar newlabel
For
.Cm transition
rules only: the new label assigned to the process after exec.
.El
.It Cm rule remove Ar id
Remove a rule by its numeric ID.
.It Cm rule clear
Remove all rules.
.It Cm rule list
List all loaded rules.
.It Cm rule load Ar file
Atomically replace all rules with those in
.Ar file .
On parse error, existing rules remain unchanged.
.It Cm rule append Ar file
Add rules from
.Ar file
to the existing rule set.
.It Cm rule validate Ar file
Check
.Ar file
syntax without loading rules.
.El
.Ss Rule Sets
Rules are organized into sets numbered 0-65535.
During rule evaluation, sets are checked in ascending order (set 0 first, then 1, etc.).
Within each set, rules are evaluated in the order they were added.
The first matching rule wins.
.Pp
Sets can be enabled or disabled without removing rules.
Disabled sets are skipped during evaluation.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm set enable Ar num | start Ns - Ns Ar end | No all
Enable rule set(s).
Rules in disabled sets are not evaluated.
.It Cm set disable Ar num | start Ns - Ns Ar end | No all
Disable rule set(s).
.It Cm set swap Ar set_a set_b
Atomically swap two sets.
Useful for hot-reloading policies without a window where no rules are active.
.It Cm set move Ar from_set to_set
Move all rules from one set to another.
.It Cm set clear Ar num
Remove all rules in the specified set.
.It Cm set list Op Ar start Ns - Ns Ar end
Show set status and rule counts.
Default range is 0-31.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fl s
option on
.Cm rule add
and
.Cm rule load
specifies the target set.
If not specified, rules go to set 0.
The
.Fl s
option overrides any
.Cm set
field in the rule file.
.Pp
In line format rules, append
.Cm set Ar N
to specify the set:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
allow exec * -> * set 5
.Ed
.Ss Policy Protection
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm lock
Lock the policy, preventing all rule and mode changes until the system
is rebooted.
This provides tamper resistance for production deployments.
Once locked, the following operations are denied with
.Er EPERM :
mode changes, default policy changes, rule add/remove/clear/load,
and set enable/disable/swap/move/clear.
.Pp
The lock is one-way and cannot be undone without rebooting.
.It Cm log Op Cm none | error | admin | deny | all
Get or set the audit log level.
Admin actions are logged to the kernel message buffer
.Pq see Xr dmesg 8 .
.Bl -tag -width "admin" -compact
.It Cm none
No logging.
.It Cm error
Log errors only.
.It Cm admin
Log policy changes (rule add/remove, mode changes).
This is the default.
.It Cm deny
Also log access denials.
.It Cm all
Log all access checks (very verbose, use for debugging).
.El
.El
.Ss Label Management
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm label get Ar path
Display the ABAC extended attribute on
.Ar path .
.It Cm label set Ar path Ar label
Set the ABAC extended attribute on
.Ar path .
The
.Ar label
is specified as comma-separated key=value pairs.
.It Cm label remove Ar path
Remove the ABAC extended attribute from
.Ar path .
.El
.Ss Testing
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm test Ar operation subject object
Simulate an access check without performing it.
Reports whether access would be allowed or denied, and which rule matched.
.El
.Sh LABEL FORMAT
Labels are comma-separated key=value pairs:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
type=app,domain=web,name=nginx
.Ed
.Pp
Keys and values are arbitrary strings.
Common conventions include:
.Bl -tag -width "sensitivity" -compact
.It Cm type
Object type (app, data, config, log, etc.)
.It Cm domain
Security domain (web, database, mail, etc.)
.It Cm name
Application or file name
.It Cm sensitivity
Classification level (public, internal, secret, etc.)
.It Cm compartment
Need-to-know compartment (hr, finance, etc.)
.El
.Sh PATTERN FORMAT
Patterns match labels using key=value pairs.
All specified pairs must match (AND logic).
.Bl -tag -width "key1=val1,key2=val2"
.It Cm *
Match any label (wildcard).
.It Cm key=value
Label must have exact key=value.
.It Cm key=*
Label must have key with any value.
.It Cm key1=val1,key2=val2
Label must have both pairs.
.It Cm !pattern
Negate the match (matches labels that do NOT match the pattern).
.El
.Sh OPERATIONS
Operations that can be controlled by rules:
.Bl -column "setextattr" "Description" -offset indent
.It Sy Operation Ta Sy Description
.It Cm exec Ta Execute a file
.It Cm read Ta Read file contents
.It Cm write Ta Write file contents
.It Cm mmap Ta Memory-map a file
.It Cm link Ta Create hard link
.It Cm rename Ta Rename file
.It Cm unlink Ta Delete file
.It Cm chdir Ta Change directory
.It Cm stat Ta Get file status
.It Cm readdir Ta Read directory contents
.It Cm create Ta Create new file
.It Cm setextattr Ta Set extended attribute
.It Cm getextattr Ta Get extended attribute
.It Cm lookup Ta Look up file in directory
.It Cm open Ta Open file
.It Cm access Ta Check file access
.It Cm debug Ta Debug process (ptrace)
.It Cm signal Ta Send signal to process
.It Cm sched Ta Scheduler operations on process
.It Cm connect Ta Socket connect
.It Cm bind Ta Socket bind to address
.It Cm listen Ta Socket listen for connections
.It Cm accept Ta Socket accept connection
.It Cm send Ta Socket send data
.It Cm receive Ta Socket receive data
.It Cm deliver Ta Packet delivery to socket
.It Cm wait Ta Wait on process
.It Cm mprotect Ta Memory protection change
.It Cm audit Ta Audit operations
.It Cm all Ta All operations
.El
.Sh CONTEXT CONSTRAINTS
Rules can include context constraints that check process attributes.
The position of
.Cm ctx:
determines what it applies to:
.Bl -tag -width "ctx: after ->" -offset indent
.It Cm ctx: No before Cm ->
Constraints on the calling process (subject).
.It Cm ctx: No after Cm ->
Constraints on the target process (object).
.El
.Pp
Multiple constraints on the same side are comma-separated (one
.Cm ctx:
per side):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ctx:uid=0,jail=host
.Ed
.Pp
Available constraints:
.Bl -tag -width "sandboxed=true" -compact
.It Cm uid= Ns Ar N
Effective UID must equal N.
.It Cm ruid= Ns Ar N
Real UID must equal N.
.It Cm gid= Ns Ar N
Effective GID must equal N.
.It Cm jail=host
Must be running on host (not in jail).
.It Cm jail=any
Must be running in a jail.
.It Cm jail= Ns Ar N
Must be in jail with ID N.
.It Cm sandboxed=true
Must be in Capsicum capability mode.
.It Cm sandboxed=false
Must not be in Capsicum capability mode.
.It Cm tty=true
Must have a controlling terminal.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Enable enforcing mode:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl mode enforcing
.Ed
.Pp
Deny execution of untrusted files:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule add deny exec '*' -> type=untrusted
.Ed
.Pp
Allow web domain to read web files:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule add allow read,write domain=web -> domain=web
.Ed
.Pp
Transition to restricted domain on exec:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule add transition exec '*' -> type=entrypoint,app=nginx \\
    => domain=web,restricted=true
.Ed
.Pp
Only root on host can run admin tools:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule add allow exec '*' ctx:uid=0,jail=host -> type=admin
.Ed
.Pp
Prevent jailed processes from debugging host processes:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule add deny debug '*' ctx:jail=any -> '*' ctx:jail=host
.Ed
.Pp
Protect sandboxed processes from debugging:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule add deny debug '*' -> '*' ctx:sandboxed=true
.Ed
.Pp
Label a file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl label set /usr/local/bin/nginx type=app,domain=web,name=nginx
.Ed
.Pp
Test if an operation would be allowed:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl test exec domain=user type=trusted
.Ed
.Ss Rule Sets
Load base policy to set 0 (default):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule load /etc/mac_abac/base.conf
.Ed
.Pp
Load application rules to set 100:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule load /etc/mac_abac/webapp.conf -s 100
.Ed
.Pp
Temporarily disable application rules:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl set disable 100
.Ed
.Pp
Hot-reload policy without downtime:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule load /etc/mac_abac/new_base.conf -s 50000
mac_abac_ctl set swap 0 50000
mac_abac_ctl set clear 50000
.Ed
.Pp
View set status:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl set list
mac_abac_ctl set list 0-100
.Ed
.Ss Policy Protection
Enable verbose logging for debugging:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl log all
.Ed
.Pp
Lock the policy for production:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl rule load /etc/mac_abac/production.conf
mac_abac_ctl mode enforcing
mac_abac_ctl lock
.Ed
.Pp
View current status including locked state:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_ctl status
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Ex -std
.Pp
Exit codes follow
.Xr sysexits 3 :
.Bl -tag -width "EX_UNAVAILABLE" -compact
.It Dv EX_OK
Success.
.It Dv EX_USAGE
Invalid command-line arguments.
.It Dv EX_NOPERM
Permission denied (must be root).
.It Dv EX_UNAVAILABLE
ABAC kernel module not loaded.
.It Dv EX_DATAERR
Invalid rule or label syntax.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 4 ,
.Xr mac_abac 4 ,
.Xr mac_abac.conf 5 ,
.Xr setextattr 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility first appeared in
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "The ABAC project" .
