.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 ABAC Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd March 9, 2026
.Dt MAC_ABAC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mac_abac
.Nd "flexible label-based Mandatory Access Control policy"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile the policy into a static kernel:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options MAC"
.Cd "options MAC_ABAC"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the policy as a kernel module at boot:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_abac_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
policy implements flexible, label-based Mandatory Access Control (MAC)
for
.Fx .
Unlike fixed policies like
.Xr mac_biba 4
or
.Xr mac_mls 4 ,
.Nm
allows administrators to define arbitrary label attributes and custom
access control rules.
.Pp
Labels are key-value pairs stored in the
.Dq system:mac_abac
extended attribute on files and inherited by processes.
Rules define access decisions based on pattern matching against subject
(process) and object (file/process) labels.
.Ss Design Philosophy
The
.Nm
policy follows a Type Enforcement model similar to SELinux domains, but with
a simpler, more flexible approach:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Labels are arbitrary key=value pairs, not predefined types
.It
Rules are first-match ordered, like
.Xr pf 4
.It
No compile-time policy \(em rules are loaded dynamically
.It
Integrates with FreeBSD security primitives (jails, Capsicum)
.El
.Ss Enforcement Modes
.Bl -tag -width "permissive"
.It Cm disabled
No access checks.
Labels are still read and stored, but not enforced.
.It Cm permissive
Access checks are performed and logged, but denials are not enforced.
Useful for policy development.
.It Cm enforcing
Full enforcement of access control decisions.
.El
.Ss Labels
Each file can have a label stored in the
.Dq system:mac_abac
extended attribute.
Labels consist of key=value pairs in newline-separated format:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
type=app
domain=web
name=nginx
.Ed
.Pp
Process labels are inherited from the parent process at fork, and can
be changed via exec transition rules.
.Pp
Files and processes without explicit labels receive a default label of
.Dq type=unlabeled .
.Ss Rules
Rules are evaluated in order (first match wins).
Each rule specifies:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Action: allow, deny, or transition
.It
Operations: which system calls to check
.It
Subject pattern: match the calling process label
.It
Object pattern: match the target object label
.It
Context constraints (optional): check process attributes (UID, jail, etc.)
.It
New label (transition rules only): label assigned after exec
.El
.Pp
If no rule matches, the default policy applies (configurable as allow or deny).
.Ss Context Constraints
Rules can include constraints on process attributes beyond labels:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
UID/GID checks
.It
Jail membership (host, any jail, specific jail)
.It
Capsicum capability mode
.It
Controlling terminal presence
.El
.Pp
Subject context applies to the calling process.
Object context applies to the target process (for debug/signal/sched operations).
.Sh SYSCTLS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.enabled
Enable/disable the policy module (0 or 1).
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.mode
Current enforcement mode (0=disabled, 1=permissive, 2=enforcing).
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.default_policy
Default when no rule matches (0=allow, 1=deny).
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.checks
Total access checks performed.
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.allowed
Access checks that returned allow.
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.denied
Access checks that returned deny.
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.rule_count
Number of active rules.
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.labels_allocated
Total labels allocated (debugging).
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.labels_freed
Total labels freed (debugging).
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.parse_errors
Label parsing errors encountered.
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.locked
Policy lock status (0=unlocked, 1=locked until reboot).
Once locked, policy cannot be modified.
This sysctl is read-only.
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.log_level
Audit log level (0=none, 1=error, 2=admin, 3=deny, 4=all).
Default is 2 (admin), which logs policy changes.
.It Va security.mac.mac_abac.extattr_name
Name of the extended attribute used to store labels.
Default is
.Dq mac_abac .
.El
.Sh LIMITS
.Bl -column "Maximum label length" "4096 bytes" -offset indent
.It Sy Limit Ta Sy Value
.It Maximum label length Ta 4,096 bytes
.It Maximum key length Ta 64 bytes
.It Maximum value length Ta 256 bytes
.It Maximum pairs per label Ta 16
.It Maximum pairs per rule pattern Ta 8
.It Maximum rules Ta 4,096
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.Ss Memory Usage
Each rule uses approximately 1.6KB of memory.
.Ss Extended Attributes
Labels are stored in the
.Dq system:mac_abac
namespace.
The filesystem must support extended attributes.
For UFS, ensure
.Cm multilabel
is set in
.Xr tunefs 8 .
ZFS supports extended attributes natively.
.Ss DTrace Probes
The module provides SDT probes for tracing.
The provider name is
.Dq abac .
.Pp
Example usage:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dtrace -n 'abac:::check-deny { printf("%s -> %s", copyinstr(arg0), copyinstr(arg1)); }'
.Ed
.Pp
Available probes:
.Bl -tag -width "abac:policy:loglevel:change" -compact
.It Li abac:rules:check:entry
Access check started.
.It Li abac:rules:check:return
Access check completed (with result).
.It Li abac:rules:check:allow
Access allowed.
.It Li abac:rules:check:deny
Access denied.
.It Li abac:rules:rule:match
Rule matched.
.It Li abac:rules:rule:nomatch
No rule matched, using default.
.It Li abac:rules:rule:add
Rule added.
.It Li abac:rules:rule:remove
Rule removed.
.It Li abac:rules:rule:clear
All rules cleared.
.It Li abac:policy:mode:change
Enforcement mode changed.
.It Li abac:policy:default:change
Default policy changed.
.It Li abac:policy:lock:set
Policy locked (until reboot).
.It Li abac:policy:loglevel:change
Log level changed.
.It Li abac:cred:transition:exec
Process label transition on exec.
.It Li abac:label:extattr:read
Label read from extended attribute.
.It Li abac:label:extattr:default
Default label assigned.
.It Li abac:label:file:set
File label set via syscall.
.It Li abac:sets:set:enable
Rule set(s) enabled.
.It Li abac:sets:set:disable
Rule set(s) disabled.
.It Li abac:sets:set:swap
Rule sets swapped.
.It Li abac:sets:set:move
Rules moved between sets.
.It Li abac:sets:set:clear
Rule set cleared.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/mac_abac/policy.conf"
.It Pa /etc/mac_abac/policy.conf
Default policy configuration file.
.It Pa /usr/local/sbin/mac_abac_ctl
Administration utility.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Basic setup to protect against untrusted executables:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Load the module
kldload mac_abac

# Set default deny policy
mac_abac_ctl default deny

# Allow execution of trusted binaries
mac_abac_ctl rule add allow exec '*' -> type=trusted
mac_abac_ctl rule add allow exec '*' -> type=system

# Allow everything else except exec
mac_abac_ctl rule add allow read,write,stat,open '*' -> '*'

# Enable enforcement
mac_abac_ctl mode enforcing

# Label trusted binaries
find /bin /sbin /usr/bin /usr/sbin -type f -exec \\
    setextattr system mac_abac "type=system" {} \\;
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 4 ,
.Xr mac_biba 4 ,
.Xr mac_mls 4 ,
.Xr mac_abac.conf 5 ,
.Xr mac_abac_ctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module first appeared in
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "The ABAC project" .
.Sh CAVEATS
.Nm
cannot be unloaded once loaded.
This is by design, as labels may be attached to vnodes and credentials
that persist across the module lifecycle.
.Pp
The module must be loaded at boot time via
.Xr loader.conf 5
or compiled into the kernel.
Loading after boot with
.Xr kldload 8
works but is not recommended for production.
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.Bl -bullet
.It
Rules are root-only.
Only processes with uid 0 can add, remove, or modify rules.
.It
Labels on files require write access to extended attributes.
Consider protecting critical files with filesystem permissions.
.It
Default policy of "allow" is permissive.
For high-security environments, use "deny" as default.
.It
Permissive mode should only be used for policy development, not production.
.It
Use
.Cm mac_abac_ctl lock
in production to prevent runtime policy modifications.
Once locked, the policy cannot be changed until reboot.
.It
Admin actions are logged to the kernel message buffer when
.Va security.mac.mac_abac.log_level
is 2 (admin) or higher.
Review logs with
.Xr dmesg 8 .
.El
