.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 vLabel Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd March 9, 2026
.Dt VLABEL.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vlabel.conf
.Nd vLabel policy configuration file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file defines the access control policy for the
.Xr mac_vlabel 4
kernel module.
It uses UCL (Universal Configuration Language) syntax.
.Pp
The configuration file is read by
.Xr vlabelctl 8
and can be loaded atomically using:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
vlabelctl rule load /etc/vlabel/policy.conf
.Ed
.Sh SYNTAX
The file uses UCL syntax.
Top-level keys are:
.Bl -tag -width "default_policy"
.It Cm mode
Enforcement mode:
.Dq disabled ,
.Dq permissive ,
or
.Dq enforcing .
.It Cm default_policy
Default when no rule matches:
.Dq allow
or
.Dq deny .
.It Cm rules
Array of rule objects.
.El
.Ss Rule Objects
Each rule in the
.Cm rules
array is an object with the following keys:
.Bl -tag -width "operations"
.It Cm id
Optional numeric rule identifier for reference.
If omitted, IDs are assigned automatically.
.It Cm action
Required.
One of:
.Dq allow ,
.Dq deny ,
or
.Dq transition .
.It Cm operations
Required.
Array of operation names, or
.Dq all .
.It Cm subject
Optional.
Pattern to match the calling process label.
If omitted, matches any subject.
.It Cm object
Optional.
Pattern to match the target object label.
If omitted, matches any object.
.It Cm newlabel
Required for
.Cm transition
rules.
The label assigned to the process after exec.
.It Cm subj_ctx
Optional.
Object specifying constraints on the calling process.
.It Cm obj_ctx
Optional.
Object specifying constraints on the target process
(only meaningful for debug, signal, and sched operations).
.El
.Ss Pattern Syntax
Patterns can be specified as:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
An object with key=value pairs (UCL object syntax)
.It
A string in comma-separated format
.It
An asterisk
.Dq *
for wildcard
.El
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Object syntax
subject = { type = "app"; domain = "web"; };

# String syntax
subject = "type=app,domain=web";

# Wildcard
subject = "*";

# Negation (does NOT match this pattern)
subject = "!type=untrusted";
.Ed
.Pp
Within a pattern, all pairs must match (AND logic).
Use multiple rules for OR logic.
.Ss Context Constraints
Context objects can contain:
.Bl -tag -width "sandboxed"
.It Cm uid
Required effective UID (integer).
.It Cm ruid
Required real UID (integer).
Cannot be used with
.Cm uid
in the same constraint.
.It Cm gid
Required effective GID (integer).
.It Cm jail
Jail constraint:
.Dq host
(not jailed),
.Dq any
(in any jail),
or a jail ID (integer).
.It Cm sandboxed
Capsicum mode:
.Cm true
(must be sandboxed) or
.Cm false
(must not be).
.It Cm tty
Terminal requirement:
.Cm true
(must have TTY) or
.Cm false
(must not).
.El
.Ss Operations
Valid operation names:
.Pp
.Bl -column "setextattr" "getextattr" "readdir" "signal" -compact
.It exec Ta read Ta write Ta mmap
.It link Ta rename Ta unlink Ta chdir
.It stat Ta readdir Ta create Ta setextattr
.It getextattr Ta lookup Ta open Ta access
.It debug Ta signal Ta sched Ta all
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Basic Whitelist Policy
Allow only labeled executables to run:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mode = "enforcing";
default_policy = "deny";

rules = [
    {
        action = "allow";
        operations = ["exec"];
        object = { type = "trusted"; };
    },
    {
        action = "allow";
        operations = ["exec"];
        object = { type = "system"; };
    },
    {
        action = "allow";
        operations = ["read", "write", "stat", "open", "readdir"];
    }
];
.Ed
.Ss Domain Isolation
Isolate web and database services:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mode = "enforcing";
default_policy = "allow";

rules = [
    # Web can access web files
    {
        action = "allow";
        operations = ["read", "write", "open"];
        subject = { domain = "web"; };
        object = { domain = "web"; };
    },

    # Database can access database files
    {
        action = "allow";
        operations = ["read", "write", "open", "create", "unlink"];
        subject = { domain = "database"; };
        object = { domain = "database"; };
    },

    # Deny cross-domain access
    {
        action = "deny";
        operations = ["read", "write"];
        subject = { domain = "web"; };
        object = { domain = "database"; };
    },
    {
        action = "deny";
        operations = ["read", "write"];
        subject = { domain = "database"; };
        object = { domain = "web"; };
    }
];
.Ed
.Ss Label Transitions
Transition into restricted domain on exec:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mode = "enforcing";

rules = [
    # Transition to web domain when starting nginx
    {
        action = "transition";
        operations = ["exec"];
        object = "type=entrypoint,app=nginx";
        newlabel = "domain=web,app=nginx,restricted=true";
    },

    # Restricted processes can only access their domain
    {
        action = "allow";
        operations = ["all"];
        subject = { domain = "web"; restricted = "true"; };
        object = { domain = "web"; };
    },
    {
        action = "deny";
        operations = ["read", "write", "exec"];
        subject = { restricted = "true"; };
    }
];
.Ed
.Ss Context Constraints
Restrict admin tools to root on host:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
rules = [
    {
        action = "allow";
        operations = ["exec"];
        object = { type = "admin"; };
        subj_ctx = {
            uid = 0;
            jail = "host";
            tty = true;
        };
    },
    {
        action = "deny";
        operations = ["exec"];
        object = { type = "admin"; };
    }
];
.Ed
.Pp
Prevent sandboxed processes from being debugged:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
rules = [
    {
        action = "deny";
        operations = ["debug"];
        obj_ctx = { sandboxed = true; };
    }
];
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac_vlabel 4 ,
.Xr vlabelctl 8
.Pp
UCL documentation:
.Lk https://github.com/vstakhov/libucl
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
configuration format first appeared in
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "The vLabel project" .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/vlabel/policy.conf"
.It Pa /etc/vlabel/policy.conf
Default configuration file location.
.El
